#LIVING RESOURCES CATEGORY -- Keystone and Foundation Species

##Question 12 What is the status of keystone and foundation species and how is it changing?

Certain species are defined as “keystone” within ecosystems, meaning they are species on which the persistence of a
large number of other species in the ecosystem depends.

“Foundation” species are single species that define much of the structure of a community by creating locally stable
conditions for other species, and by modulating and stabilizing fundamental ecosystem processes.12 These are typically
dominant biomass producers in an ecosystem and strongly influence the abundance and biomass of many other species.
Examplesinclude krill and other zooplankton, kelp, forage fish such asrockfish, anchovy, sardines and coral. Foundation
species exhibit similar control over ecosystems as keystone species, but their high abundance distinguishesthem.
Changes in either keystone or foundation species may transform ecosystem structure through disappearances of or
dramatic increasesin the abundance of dependentspecies. Not only do the abundances of keystone and foundation species
affect ecosystem integrity, but measures of condition can also be important to determining the likelihood that these
species will persist and continue to provide vital ecosystem functions. Measures of condition may include growth rates,
fecundity, recruitment, age-specific survival, contaminant loads, pathologies (e.g., disease incidence, tumors,
deformities), the presence and abundance of critical symbionts or parasite loads.

Caribbean spiny lobsters (Panulirus argus) are one of the Florida Keys' most economically important commercial fisheries, and the Florida Keys stock is heavily exploited by both the commercial fishery and by recreational divers and snorkelers. Between the two fisheries, a large percentage of the available adult population is removed each year (Cox and Hunt 2005).

Sea urchins, more specifically the long-spined sea urchin (Diadema antillarum), were historically one of the most important invertebrate grazers on coral reefs in the Florida Keys, helping control the abundance of algae. Though in some parts of the Caribbean the long-spined sea urchin played a major role in controlling algal biomass (Levitan 1988), the roles of both piscine herbivores and sea urchins in controlling algal dominance on coral reefs are still being discovered (Furman and Heck 2008).

Fish
Because of the Florida Keys' connection to adjacent aquatic environments, a variety of different fish assemblages rely on sanctuary resources for all, or part of, their life history. Whether fishes are estuarine, demersal, or pelagic, their species richness is correlated with temporal and seasonal influences. Historic long-term studies, using both visual and consumptive sampling techniques, yielded between 389 and 440 total fish species (Longley and Hildebrand 1941, Starck 1968).

Birds
The Florida Keys host more than 285 species of birds, many of which are seabird or shorebird species. Birds most frequently encountered in and around the water include terns, gulls, plovers, cormorants, pelicans, herons, egrets, osprey (Pandion haliaetus) and the Magnificent Frigatebird (Fregata magnificens). The Florida Keys are also an important stop-over point for other migratory birds and waterfowl.

Turtles
Five of the seven extant sea turtles frequent the waters of the sanctuary, and some species including the green, loggerhead (Caretta caretta) and leatherback (Dermochelys coriacia) sea turtles nest along the Florida coastline. All marine turtles are either threatened or endangered and thus protected by the Endangered Species Act in U.S. territorial waters (ESA; see following subsection). The highest densities of sea turtles in the Gulf of Mexico region

Marine Mammals


